I have this idea that I call the the
feather brick dump truck
phenomenon and basically what that means
is when we are showing early signs of
burnout our body will give us feedback
usually in subtle ways in the beginning
so the feather might be waking up in the
morning and feeling a little bit tired a
little bit maybe a little bit exhausted
the brick you know maybe you ignore that
or you don't notice it and then three or
four weeks later you you have like a
fight with someone or an argument or you
just you just feel fr gred and terrible
and you you lose your lose your cool and
then maybe the the dump truck is a month
later or even a year later there's like
a full-blown Health crisis or you
develop type two diabetes or you know
there's a whole range of things or maybe
you get fired like ideally you want to
notice when it's the feather and then
make adjustments or shifts then and not
have to wait until you experience the
the full-blown pain of the of the dump
truck which unfortunately is what
happens to a lot of people especially
when they experience burnout for the
first time
today my guest is Johnny Miller Johnny
teaches courses and does one-on-one
coaching with tech professionals helping
them with something he calls nervous
system Mastery which is essentially a
set of tools and techniques for
cultivating calm upgrading your
resilience and increasing your aliveness
if you can get better at dealing with
stressful situations avoiding burnout
and being more confident in meetings and
big presentations it becomes a
superpower and a huge advantage in both
business and in life I actually read a
post by Johnny about a year ago and it
totally changed the way that I think
about nervousness and stress and I still
apply many of his lessons today in our
conversation we dive deep into Johnny's
key insights we talk about why the best
way to stay calm in stressful situations
is to focus on the state of your body
and not your mind how to create calm and
confidence by changing the state of your
body through breath Johnny shares a
bunch of very specific breathing exerc
exercises for creating calm and also for
creating energy that we actually try out
on the podcast we also get into a bunch
of advice for how to tell if you're
seeing early signs of burnout how to
release emotional debt that you may be
feeling also why feeling the feels gives
you a competitive advantage in business
also a practice called ape which reminds
you to focus on your awareness your
posture and your emotions that I've
started practicing ever since our chat
and so much more if you enjoy this chat
definitely check out Johnny's full
course at nsasy
docomond
us this time of year is prime for career
reflection and setting goals for
professional growth I always like to
spend this time reflecting on what I
accomplished the previous year what I
hope to accomplish the next year and
whether this is the year I look for a
new opportunity that's where today's
sponsor teal comes in teal provides you
with the tools to run an amazing job
search with an AI powered Resume Builder
job tracker cover letter generator and
Chrome extension that integrates with
over 40 job boards teal is the
all-in-one platform you need to run a
more streamlined and efficient job
search and stand out in this competitive
market there's a reason nearly 1 million
people have trusted teal to run their
job search if you're thinking of making
a change in the New Year leverage teal
to grow your career on your own terms
get started for free at TL hq.com Lenny
that's Tal hq.com
Lenny this episode is brought to you by
vanta helping you streamline your
security compliance to accelerate your
growth thousands of fast growing
companies like Gusto Comm Kora and
modern treasury trust Vana to help build
scale manage and demonstrate their
security and compliance programs and get
ready for audits in weeks not months by
offering the most in- demand security
and privacy Frameworks such as sock 2
ISO 2701 gdpr Hippa and many many more
vant helps companies obtain the reports
they need to accelerate growth build
efficient compliance processes mitigate
risks to their businesses and build
trust with external stakeholders over
5,000 fast growing companies use vant to
automate up to 90% of the work involved
with sock 2 and these other Frameworks
for a limited time Lenny's podcast
listeners get $1,000 off vanta go to
v.com Lenny that's
v.com Lenny to learn more and to claim
your discounts get started
[Music]
today Johnny thank you so much for being
here welcome to the podcast it's great
to be here Lenny so I read this post
that you wrote I think it was over a
year ago at this point it was called the
operating manual for your nervous system
and first of all blew my mind when I
read it second of all I always think
about it when I get nervous or anxious
in a situation it's like really stuck
with me and I know that people in the
workplace often get nervous and anxious
doing all presentations meetings
performance reviews all the things so I
thought it'd be awesome just to dive
into the stuff that you've kind of
uncovered about how we can become less
nervous and less anxious before we get
into the meat of it I'd love to just
spend a couple minutes just getting a
sense of why you got into this stuff
what actually got you to spend so much
of your energy and life force trying to
understand how nervous system works how
to get people to be less nervous and
anxious my story starts in I was kind of
have a background in Tech I had a
startup um we went through Tech Stars
back in 2012 about 5 and a half years
into that experience I went through
burnout which is you know pretty common
in the in the startup world but that
actually wasn't the trigger for me um I
find that usually people that get into
this type of work there's some kind of
catalyst or some kind of challenging
life event and for me that was uh
October 23rd 2017 and my fiance at the
time had an anxiety attack and she took
her own life and that kind of completely
just just destroyed me at the time and I
realized that I'd been so disconnected
from my body and my emotions um and it
kind of sent me on this this five plus
year journey to uh to kind of discover
all of this this inner landscape that
I'd been numb from the neck down and I I
went into breath work meditation
Retreats uh did you know hundreds of
breath work Journeys researched with a
breath lab over in barley and basically
just kind of directed all of my focus
and attention onto understanding this
this inner landscape that I'd been
pretty much oblivious to and since then
I've been you know working with Founders
Executives running courses and and
teaching what I'm learning and hopefully
still researching at the same time as
well wow and I imagine the thinking was
that if your wife had these skills she
would have had another path yeah that
was that was definitely part of it yeah
and and also just since realizing how
many people are struggling with with
anxiety depression all of this kind of
constellation of mental health
challenges both in the workplace and and
at home as well and yeah it's been a
very rewarding Journey all right this
this episode's already gotten very heavy
and uh and I'm sucked in I'm excited to
learn all these things that you've
uncovered so let's just get into the
meat of it just talk about this kind of
General method that you've found for how
to help people become less nervous and
anxious yeah so I I find this um kind of
top down bottom up distinction to be
incredibly helpful most people when they
try to calm down the they use kind of
tactical reframes or maybe mindfulness
or maybe you know reframing the
situation in the positive light there's
lots of different practices that people
use which do have some effect but in my
experience working with with the
physiology using what's known as a
bottomup approach primarily using the
breath although there's also other
approaches that you can use it's just
such a like rapidly more effective way
at shifting your state and to kind of
give a little bit of context and maybe
some science as well we have what's
known as afferent and efferent neurons
kind of going up up and down our body
and there's four times more afferent
neurons going from the body to the brain
as from the brain to the body so you can
almost imagine there's like a Super
Highway of traffic of information going
up to the brain and much less four times
less going from the brain to the body
and so by learning how to kind of pull
on the levers of our physiology we can
rapidly change our state and then from
there by changing our state that impacts
the thoughts and feelings that we have
so so instead of kind of trying to
change the story or trying to fix
something or trying to solve something
which is what you know most people do by
default myself included in the past if
you change your state first then there's
a cascading effect which changes your
your thoughts and your feelings okay
amazing yeah and just to like share how
I felt when I was reading this and
trying to understand this approach is
whenever I get nervous there's always
this like oh my body is starting to feel
anxious and then I think of a reason
like often times I don't know why it
gets nervous why my body's starting to
create this feeling of anxiety and then
I often realize I'm just now trying to
just explain why happen oh I have this
like big meeting coming up or I have
this podcast episode I'm nervous about
or I'm not going to make a deadline for
my newsletter like I often experience
this where it's just like oh something
feels nervous and then okay here's the
explanation so maybe just along those
lines what else is there that might be
helpful for people to think about in
this context I mean I think it's helpful
to
um understand the process by which by
changing the way that we breathe for
example it shifts our physiological
State and changes our nervous system so
if you're if you're listening to this
maybe youen you can try this as well if
you if you start breathing into your
upper chest of shallow um fairly fairly
rapid maybe even through the mouth that
will then there's a part of your brain
called the insula cortex which is
basically constantly spying on the way
that we're breathing and it will
register that change it will then send
information to activate the the
endocrine system which then creates
shift in our in our blood chemistry
these sympathetic nervous system gets
activated and that increase in
Adrenaline and cortisol you know starts
to flood flood your body everyone's
probably very familiar with that feeling
and then that will then have a a
cascading impact on the thoughts that
you're having and the way that you feel
and so like like you like you just
shared we have a tendency to kind of
confabulate or make up stories that
match the state that we're that we're in
and so that's that's kind of what
happens when we're breathing in that way
and then you can also consciously change
your breath to breathe in a different
way which has the reverse effect which
which I can go into but I'll I'll pause
there yeah so I think one of the big
actionable takeaways here there here is
that instead of trying to convince
yourself no this talk is going to go
great I don't need to worry about how
I'm going to look in this meeting
basically instead of going top down
trying to calm your body through thought
your advice is calm your body first
because then your mind will notice hey
I'm actually not as nervous as I thought
maybe things are going to be okay is
that right
yeah precisely and um I mean I've used
this myself many times before
presentations I I gave a tedex talk a
few years ago and I was like my entire
body was I was just terrified and I did
15 minutes of of this breathing practice
before and walked on stage kind of
almost cool as a cucumber it's it's very
effective sounds too good to be true but
we're going to do some of these
exercises for people before we get into
why why is it that breath specifically
so powerful it feels like such a strange
thing to work so well just this idea of
breathing in a different way you talked
a bit about this uh I forget what you
called it that kind of watches how
you're breathing but I guess what else
can you share about just why is breath
so effective in changing our state sure
well it's one of the few things which
happens automatically but we can also
control it consciously and so what
scientists have discovered that when the
exhale is twice as long as the inhale it
has a calming effect and when the inhale
is either more intense or twice as long
as the exhale it has an activating
effect so you can kind of think of this
as like a like an up or down lever on
the nervous system you also have this
really clever way of describing this
system you call it State over story
essentially focusing on the state of
your body versus the story you're
telling yourself is that the way to
think about it and can you just talk
about that concept yeah so it's
basically a short hand for for what
we've just been talking about which is
most people tend to approach the problem
or try to solve things on the level of
story so there's multiple ways you can
do that through the breath as we just
talked about you can also defocus your
your gaze and kind of relax your eyes
and that has a similar effect it can
expand your awareness and kind of bring
your awareness to behind you the Sid of
you and Below you or you can breathe in
in these ways which emphasize the exhale
so when we breathe in a way with say the
the exhale twice as long as the
inhale that part of the brain the
insulin cortex then sends signals to the
parasympathetic nervous system which
then has the cascading effect on our
endocrine system and calms us down and
and what I usually find as well is that
the the the kind of reactive thoughts
and feelings that we have when we're in
that kind of anxious Loop they can be
self-reinforcing and so you know if
someone has a thought of like oh no I'm
I'm nervous before this important
presentation then that exacerbates the
breathing pattern and then the whole
thing just goes into this spiral which
can end up in like fullblown panic
attacks if it's not if there's not an
intervention of some sorts yeah that's
what I find with my n like I hate
talking on stage I I get nervous before
every podcast like this is not my
natural state interesting yeah and the I
hide it well is that is that still the
case with podcast today absolutely um
and it's like different levels of
nervousness but it's always just like oh
there we go like I'm not a performer
person even like I kind of push myself
to do this podcast as a way to get
better at this to be honest and so it's
still a thing that I think about and
what I find is the nervousness comes
from exactly what you described it the
nervousness of being nervous it's lot
like I don't know there's no reason
specifically to be anxious but it's I
don't know how I'll be once I do the
thing so it's like nervous of what it
might look like or act end up being like
so that's exactly what I R into yeah and
and there there's obviously you know
people say mindfulness meditation things
like that that that can increase the the
psychological space between stimulus and
response and that is something that
obviously does help over the long term
but it's in my opinion no nowhere near
as kind of rapid and effective and
efficient as is just changing the way
that you're breathing awesome so let's
let's get into it I know you have a
couple exercises specifically for this
and then and then we'll go from there we
can stack a few of the exercises and
I'll try and keep it to like a minute or
so um so yeah if you want to get comfy
in your chair and sit up straight feel
your your butt on the seat and I find it
help helpful to kind of be aware of the
space behind you and above you as well
kind of expanding your awareness so that
you're you're aware of the space behind
to the sides and above and should we
close our eyes yeah and close your eyes
down if you're listening and driving
obviously don't do that but yeah closing
closing the eyes down for sure helps and
now we're just going to do a simple
breath going to inhale in through the
nose for four we're going to hold the
breath at the top for four and we're
going to Exhale for eight and then we're
going to repeat so let the breath
go and inhaling through the nose inhale
2 3 4 hold the breath 2 2 3 4 and exhale
eight 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 inhale 2 3 4 hold
the breath 2 3 4 and exhale 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 and now you can let go of the breath
completely and we'll end with with one
round of humming which is um
surprisingly effective at calming as
well so take a full breath in and
humming through the nose all the way to
the end of
[Music]
exhale let out a sigh if that feels good
and open open up your
eyes I feel extremely
calm I should do this every every
podcast episode before we start and note
on the the humming it also releases
nitric oxide which is a Vaso dilator and
that helps to create that kind of
calming effect and it also reduces eye
tension as well so I'll do it if I've
been looking to screen for too long it's
really good for kind of reducing eye
fatigue as well and there's also like a
veg nerve component to it because your
body's vibrating is that true yeah
precisely so it it kind of tones or
stimulates the vegus nerve which
stimulates the parasympathetic nervous
system what's your advice for doing this
is this like before you go into a big
meeting or presentation how do you apply
this I kind of like to like to share
building a toolkit of different
practices that are appropriate for
different contexts so something like the
the 448 breathing you could do pretty
much anywhere without anyone necessarily
noticing humming is slightly more
obvious but you know if if you're about
to jump on a zoom or something you can
you can totally do it with your eyes
closed things like expanding your
awareness or bringing your awareness
down to your feet and your hands which
creates a kind of grounding calming
effect that also you can do if you're in
a busy room maybe you have social
anxiety even orienting and kind of
labeling things that you're hearing and
feeling kind of bringing the awareness
and attention back into the body that
also has an effect and then there's
longer practices for say non-sleep deep
rests belly breathing things that you
can do if you have 10 20 minutes and
you're at home and and you want a
downshift so I I like to kind of give
people a a big toolkit to see what works
for them and then cherry pick which ones
are suitable to different situations and
and another way that I I like think
about this is I call it if this then
breathe so it's like if I feel
overwhelmed then I do the humming if I
feel anxious then I do 448 breathing or
alter a breathing and kind of having my
own little like recipe set that I have
for different context is is really
helpful and I work with people to kind
of build those tool kits for themselves
this sounds like uh it needs to be a
website where people can go with these
list of if then then that is there a
place we could send people in the show
notes and if not you should make one
before we go live there is not currently
it's part of the curriculum in in the
course that I have but it's I can I can
maybe see if I can spin one up as well
but yeah okay cool we'll link to the
course of nothing else amazing okay
along this line of uh calming breath
exercise huberman also has a different
version which I've tried and I'm going
to do both now of you breathe in fully
and then you breathe in a little bit
more imagine you've seen that piece of
advice that's also fantastic it's he
calls it the physiological sigh and it
um it's both very effective especially
if you just have like you know 5 seconds
and you just take a take a full sigh
it's great it I'd also add that the Sigh
happens naturally as a result of doing
these downshifting practices so if you
notice after you do let's say the 448
breathing at the end you might naturally
just want to let out of sight and that's
a signal that your body is naturally
downshifting or if you're if you're with
a friend and you feel just like
comfortable and and relaxed then your
body might sigh and it's it's something
that we do a lot and as you say you can
consciously do it and that that will
help as well that's another one of the
practices awesome so link to that and I
think throughout this episode as you
said we're going to give people a bunch
of tools that they can use and it feels
like some are like in the moment I need
to feel calmer right now here's thing
you could do and then there's things you
can do ongoing that build I guess
another way to think about is just make
your body more calm as a baseline I'll
practice to work on there yeah precisely
awesome okay I think the other breathing
exercise we're going to do is uh the
opposite get you all excited is that
right yeah sure let's yeah we can do
that as well I call this expressor
breath so this is the opposite this is
very activating um I would only
recommend this if you're feeling
lethargic or maybe instead of drinking a
coffee in the afternoon you could do
this for a minute or so in the uh in the
scientific literature it's it's Bell's
breath or Breath of Fire and it
basically looks like a series of Rapid
excels through the nose I like to keep
it through the nose only because if you
do it through the mouth it can be very
you know too activating and it can kind
of overwhelm people obviously this's the
Wim Hof practice that I'm sure many
people are familiar with so this is like
a a more gentle version of if Wim hoof
is like Red Bull this is kind of like
a a more coffee I like that and you call
it the espressor breath espresso so yeah
that's a good metaphor there yeah yeah
so um yeah let's let's do it so again
kind of sit up straight and this time
you you want to be pumping the breath
from your from your lower belly and you
pump the breath on the exhale so I'll
demonstrate it briefly it's like breathe
in okay so yeah take a full breath in
and
begin and let
go and full breath in and sigh on the
exhale I already feel a little bit
tingly I'm energized let's do this go go
go go that was great okay look at that
we're back to where we started the full
circle of energy that was great up and
down and then how long do you recommend
doing that one for so um it kind of
depends on how activating you find it
but I usually find 30 30 breaths per
round and then kind of take a breath
have a long pause on the exhale and then
if you want to do another round or two
amazing and the cases where this might
be helpful is maybe you're about to give
a big talk like I guess in a talk you
both want energy and you want calm
that's kind of complicated you can
certainly especially if you're if you're
kind of meetings early in the morning
and you haven't quite got going yet you
can do the espressor breath to begin
with and that activates you and then do
some of the downshifting practices to
kind of ground and stabilize that that
aliveness are there any other tactical
breathing exercises that are worth doing
real quick I know we'll get into some
longer practices and deeper stuff but is
there anything else that would be
helpful here no I think we've covered
kind of the bases I don't want to
overwhelm people too much just as a
takeaway there's kind of these two
Techni
one to help you get more calm when you
need to be calm in the moment the other
is to get energy and then I guess is are
these things that you recommend doing
ongoing to build this muscle in your
body or are these mostly for you need
this now in the moment and it's not
worth just doing a few times a day even
when you're fine yeah great question so
I like to kind of recommend both a
morning practice particularly to kind of
build the the muscle of just of just
doing it and getting used to it so um
you know maybe 5 minutes in the morning
before you start work um before
breakfast something like that and then
you're more likely to remember that you
kind of have access to that in the
moment because usually the challenge is
that when someone is kind of in that
like flustered State remembering to do
the practice is often the last thing
that comes to mind so by kind of having
a deliberate practice for you know at
least kind of seven to 10 days and so
that you get get the hang of it then it
feels much more natural to do it when
you're feeling like that's kind of like
playing the game on hard mode when
you're when you're really stressed and
anxious it's like that's when you need
it the most but it's also when you're
least likely to remember to do it
awesome okay so the first exercise to
calm you down is essentially breathe in
4 seconds hold it for 4 seconds breathe
out slowly for eight seconds and do that
for about 30 seconds is that right or
for a minute yeah I'd say for at least a
minute or two we kind of did a short
shorter version um I'll also add that
the important thing is that the exhale
is twice as long as the inhale so if
exhaling for eight is too long you could
do 336 or even 224 or even 5510
depending on your your lung capacity
essentially and your CO2 tolerance okay
good to know and then the espressor
breath when you need energy where you
just kind of pump air out of your belly
through your nose and you do that for
how long would you recommend two to
three rounds of 30 okay 30 pumps yeah
and again the reason this is effective
and Powerful is coming back to your
original big Insight that the our state
is driven by what our body is doing and
our mind often explains what we're
feeling based on what our body is doing
so that if you can change the state of
your body and become less nervous in
your body your mind will be like all
right everything's fine yeah and and
maybe something that we haven't touched
on yet but I think is important to add
in is this idea of interception or
sematic awareness and the reason I bring
it in is because if you you do this
practice but you're not really aware
aware of your body and how you feel then
it'll be less compelling to you but if
you're kind of tuned into like
Sensations in your body what's going on
you're more likely to notice the
difference in the shifts great so let's
get into that that was something I
definitely wanted to touch on you have
this awesome acronym to help you with
this process of introspection so talk
about what that is and then how to
actually go about becoming better and
being aware of what your body is doing
yeah so it's it's this this idea of
interception which is um known as like a
six sense and basically it's our ability
to kind of sense track and feel our
internal landscape and I like to use the
metaphor of a chef in the same way that
you you train your flavor palette for
kind of sweet spicy Umami things like
that you can also train your in
interceptive palette and become more
aware of the the internal Sensations
whether that's your breath whether it's
tension whether it's moods and emotions
whether it's the quality of your
awareness the quality of your thoughts
and the more kind of in tune with that
you are the more likely you are to
notice the kind of early warning signs
of something like anxiety because
usually certainly a panic attack doesn't
come out of nowhere there will be a kind
of cascade of subtle things that happen
in your body that eventually result in
in anxiety and so if you can catch those
things early and kind of like like nip
them in the bud and and do one of these
practices then you can avoid the kind of
10 out of 10 worst case scenarios okay
awesome so I know that there's also
specific things you recommend people pay
attention to to understand what their
body is doing in this process of inter
intraception yeah intra okay what is it
interception interos as opposed to
exteroception which is awareness of all
the external stimuli got it I guess
before we get to that so you mentioned
that it's like another sense we have and
I think that's a really important point
that I think maybe people didn't catch
so we have these five senses obviously
taste and smell and vision and a touch
but you're finding and research showed
basically this is another sense people
don't really know we have right yeah
exactly and it has been studied you
quite quite a lot especially in the last
decade or so and there's a number of
interesting kind of findings from the
research that I found one being that um
ADHD tends to correlate with low levels
of
interception as does if people have PTSD
or trauma again interception is lowered
and I'd certainly say for myself you
know for the first 25 years of my life I
was fairly numb from the neck down I was
not very aware to what was happening in
my body in real time I was also reading
a book recently called the hour between
dog and wolf which looked at uh Wall
Street Traders and they correlated
higher degrees of interception with
basically making more money and making
better decisions and and I I think the
the thesis was that by tuning into what
their body was doing in certain moments
they they could pick up on things on
like more intuitive decision- making
essentially so I think there's like a
specific list of things that you
recommend people pay attention to their
posture their breath things like that
what is that list and then how do we
actually do this better yeah so I I
simplify this to ape which basically is
an acronym which stands for awareness
posture and emotion so to kind of go
through each one by one awareness is uh
to give an example like I could narrow
my awareness and become kind of really
focused and just you kind of tense up
and it also it's quite activating some
times or you can relax and expand your
awareness and be aware of like the space
above me the space behind me the space
below me and that is generally kind of a
calming thing posture is fairly
self-explanatory but again our posture
affects kind of how we how we
feel shifting there y um and then and
then emotion um which I include kind of
symatic or body based Sensations which
arise so both kind of what what is the
overall mood and the flavor or the
texture that that I'm feeling like right
now maybe it's it's like excitement
maybe there's there's some Joy I'm
noticing some like there's some like
heat in my belly probably from the
breathing yeah there's like a little bit
of tightness in my lower back from
working out yesterday so just kind of
sense kind of mapping that um landscape
of sensation and and for most people
it's almost like it's like like a terror
in Incognito like you have those maps of
like hiby dragons and for a lot of
people there's just these big kind of
blind spots in their body and the advice
here is so there's This Acronym AP and
the advice is think about this these
three things when you're
feeling something that you may not like
basically something's going on slash
just often come back to this I imagine
just like whenever you can think of oh
ape awareness posture emotion is that
how to use this yeah exactly so again it
can be something that you do kind of
before you start your day maybe like W
with a cup of tea I I like to drink tea
and just kind of do like like a body
scan essentially and just check each of
those three areas and it's also it's
it's really valuable particularly if
you're if you know if you're having
racing thoughts or something doesn't
feel quite right instead of just
tackling the problem on the L the the
level of the mind kind of dropping down
into the body and um bringing that kind
of into into the picture as well I find
to be really helpful basically
as often as you can and generally when
things are feeling a little off just
remember ape what is my awareness how's
my posture and then what am I feeling am
I feeling sad am I feeling happy excited
angry things like that I think you also
talk about breath like you have a list
you wrote about this of other things
that you might want to pay attention to
actually finding paying attention to my
my breath is doing is really powerful
too so I'm gonna try like a b Vape
version of this
I'm going to try to think about what am
I where's my breath coming from what am
I feeling there yeah so so the breath
the breath and Sensations are two other
ones that are really helpful the breath
in particular often people will there's
there's an idea of of like email apnea
when people are checking their emails
they will without noticing it start to
hold their breath which is generally a
very activating thing to do or as I
mentioned earlier if your breath is
through the mouth and shallow and into
the upper chest that will also be very
activating versus is your breath through
the nose is it kind of into the belly
and into the sides of the rib cage and
does it feel easeful basically like
breathing without tension is is ideal
what I think about when using this
practice is if I were sitting in a
meeting and just like not like not
feeling like amazingly confident just
like come back to This Acronym Bape or
ape whichever one you want to choose
just like how am I feeling right now oh
wow my whole stomach is clenched because
I'm maybe nervous about what might
happen or I'm not breathing at all or my
posture is really bad so I think in a
meeting would be really helpful here
maybe you're about to get on a zoom or
an important call or something like that
maybe on one-on-one is there anything
else any other moments that might be
good that kind of triggers for people of
like oh I should really be aware of
what's happening right now let me do an
an AP exercise yeah well just to kind of
um piggyback on what you just said if
you're about to jump on a meeting and
you're noticing that your stomach is
clenched like that's actually really
useful data to kind of be like like H
like why am I
like why is this happening is the like
is it your intuition kind of saying that
you know maybe you shouldn't do this
deal with someone or maybe like
something is off and so it's a sign to
kind of explore that more um or it could
be that you've been triggered by
something or something that someone said
and you've only just realized it and
then that's again like more information
or something that you can you can
reflect on or go into is there anything
in your life recently that is an example
of this where you're feeling unsure and
maybe you realize oh here's what my
body's doing maybe I should pay more
attention to this actually last week I I
did a podcast conversations where I have
a podcast myself and I got off the call
and I remember I felt or got off the
podcast and I felt pretty like exhausted
and I felt like my there was this kind
of tension in my chest
and this and again my breath was kind of
all over the place and I realized that I
had I'd very much overcommitted myself
for that week like I'd scheduled
back-to-back podcast interviews the
podcast wasn't even the priority for
kind of you know what I'm focusing on in
this in this quarter so I then made the
decision to just push back all my
episodes until uh until the summer
basically I love that example I know
that feeling very
well I'm
sure when you wrote about this idea of
interception you connected it to burnout
and I think you talked about how this is
one of the best tools to avoid burnout
is that is that right am I remembering
that right and if so how do you think
about this and burnout and avoiding
burnout in general something a lot of
people experience yeah so I have this
idea that I call the the feather brick
dump truck
phenomenon and basically what that means
is when we are showing early signs of
burnout our body will give us feedback
usually in subtle ways in the beginning
so the feather might be waking up in the
morning and feeling little bit tired a
little bit maybe a little bit exhausted
the brick you know maybe you ignore that
or you don't notice it and then three or
four weeks later you you have like a
fight with someone or an argument or you
just you just feel frustrated and
terrible and you you lose your lose your
cool and then maybe the the dump truck
is a month later or even a year later
there's like a full-blown Health crisis
or you develop type two diabetes or you
know there's a whole range of things or
maybe you get fired like there's a bunch
of different things that can happen but
normally
depending on how attuned or depending on
someone's interceptive capacity like
ideally you want to notice when it's the
feather and then make adjustments or
shifts then and not have to wait until
you experience the the full-blown pain
of the of the dump truck which
unfortunately is what happens to a lot
of people um especially when they
experience burnout for the first time
this is such an important point and such
a good way of thinking about it reminds
me of Andy John's in the episode we had
there of just how long and willing to
the episode there of just like how all
these little things came up along the
way and then eventually just became
incredibly unsustainable to live the
life that he was living MH this episode
is brought to you by Meo do you ever
feel like your projects aren't as
organized as you like them to be or it's
way too hard for people on your team to
find all the documents and files and
context that they need for their project
Miro helps you streamline your workflows
organize information and get your whole
team on the same page if you want to see
what miror can do for you check out my
miror board board that the mirror team
helped me create which includes all of
my favorite plug-in-play templates like
a user Journey map my favorite one pager
template plus a brainstorming guide my
board also has a place for you to share
suggestions for this podcast and also
answer a question that I have for you
you can then take my mirral board and
easily create your own to see how it
feels make sure to check out some of my
favorite features like the sticky notes
the inline comments and charts and also
their really cool diagramming tools
check it out at mirro.com Len your first
three mirror boards are free when you
sign up today at mirro.com Lenny find
Simplicity in your most complex projects
with mro that's
m.com
Lenny what are some examples of this
feather so your advice here is just like
pay attention to these little signs that
like you're not living a sustainable
life right now what are some examples of
these kind of feathery signs of like
maybe I need to change something yeah so
I'll tie this in with a concept that I
call emotional debt which is basically
when our when our nervous system
experiences stress there's what's known
as a mobilization cycle and if that
cycle isn't completed or we don't get to
downshift or relax on the other side
that gets stored in the body as
allostatic load um which I call
emotional debt and over time that
creates fragility in the nervous system
and so what that fragility can look like
is anything from being impact by small
things in a kind of disproportionate way
so noticing that you're more reactive
than normal maybe you're a little bit
more Snappy maybe you get frustrated by
little things maybe your sleep isn't as
good maybe you wake up not feeling fully
rested may maybe kind of relationships
are often like especially intimate
relationships are usually a place that
the shows up or relationships at work so
those are kind of the classic early
warning signs and then as that emotional
Deb threshold increases in the same way
that say with technical debt if you're
building a product in the beginning it's
fine and in fact it's even necessary in
the beginning like it's great that our
body can buffer this stress response um
because it allows us to function but if
we don't pay off that technical debt or
emotional debt then over time it
accumulates and it's um it can also come
out through kind of Health crises health
challenges um the it just gets basically
progressively worse until until that
debt is paid off feel like a lot of
people listening are like yes I know
exactly what you
mean how does one notice that you're
building emotional debt and then how do
you start to release this debt and pay
off this debt what what I've seen with
um some of some of my founder clients
and in in the research that we did where
we we interviewed 260 leaders what can
often happen is that emotional debt will
increase in increase and increase until
it gets to a point where we are well
outside what's known as a wind of
Tolerance and at that point there's like
there's like a crash it's almost like
the fuse switch blows and there's
there's exhaustion maybe there's like
complete inability to get up off the
couch and for some people people with
you know large nervous system capacity
they can keep going for five years maybe
10 years and they can kind of like keep
building this up and and it becomes
normalized to kind of live in a way
where you're always on and never really
relaxing or coming down or what what one
really key sign actually is if you're
not able to kind of naturally downshift
or downregulate your nervous system at
the end of a day without something like
wine or or CBD or some kind of like
external substance that's a sign that
you're you kind of reached a certain
threshold of emotional debt and then how
does one start to pay off this debt if
you've spent years just working way too
hard you've had relationship that just
isn't working great I don't I know like
I imagine most people go to therapy and
just kind of talk through all these
things and try to work through their
challenges what do you recommend if
you're just like man I feel like I have
this what should I
do yeah well it's I mean that that's a
big question um I'm actually I'll
probably get some push back for this but
I'm not a big fan of talk therapy alone
or at least therapy that doesn't have a
sematic or body based component and um
from my understanding of the nervous
system and and how we store this this
stress just talking about things and
keeping things on the level of the
intellect doesn't actually address the
root of the challenge what what we need
to do is create a certain sense of of
safety to kind of go into those buffered
emotional responses and feel them all
the way through and allow that
mobilization mobilization reflex to
complete and so um to kind of give a
personal example I uh when I was living
in barley I did kind of several hundred
breath work Journeys where you kind of
breathe in a certain way to get into an
altered state and then in that place
these These Memories would arise of
these these things that happened you
know 5 10 years ago and my body would
like it would either move a certain way
or the anger would come through
sometimes it would be sadness or grief
often there's there's a lot of uh stored
emotion that's held in our body that
just needs permission to kind of be felt
through and be released and so for me it
was a journey of coming into like right
relationship with my with my anger and
and my grief and honestly my shame as
well like giving myself permission to
feel this like Gunk that had been stored
in my in my pelvis so I'm not saying you
have to go to Barley and do 200 breath
work Journeys like that's definitely not
that's I mean that's that's that's a
path but first it it begins with as I
said cultivating interception and even
being aware that there is this tension
there is there are these things in your
body
secondly having the practices of self
regulation so that if these things come
up you don't get overwhelmed you're able
to downshift in ground and then thirdly
it's the practice of what I call
emotional fluidity which is basically
creating the conditions of welcoming the
full spectrum of emotions as they arise
and often it's very helpful to have a a
guide or or a sematic practitioner I
like sematic experiencing homi a two
modalities I'm a big fan of and yeah
that's that's a journey and a process
and it depends you know how many years
you've been operating in a in a slightly
numbed way um and it's it's different
for everyone but it begins by tuning
into and listening to the body and then
having honestly curiosity about what is
what is there and just following that
Curiosity and the body starts to kind of
show you what is what is ready to be
seen I love that it always comes back to
kind of the original place we started
which is that the way we feel as a very
bottom up body body based system it's
not we feel something and our body gets
nervous it's our body gets nervous and
we're like oh here's why I'm nervous and
your advice is just focus a lot on
helping your body release the stuff that
you've built up this debt and then also
just when you're nervous in the moment
focus on getting your body to a state
versus trying to convince your mind now
everything's going to be
okay exactly and specifically on the
therapy route just to touch on that so
your advice there is if you were to work
with a therapist and you feel really you
feel a lot of this uh stuff that we're
talking about is focus on a somatic
oriented therapy where it's body
oriented not just thinking about it and
talking through stuff it's actually
convincing your body this is going to be
here's a way to helping your body
release this debt
essentially yeah I mean you can you can
understand in you know precise detail
about whatever the challenge was from 5
10 15 years ago but if you're unable to
connected to the the correlating like
Sensations in the body like usually if
if say I don't know if I was to imagine
someone shouted at me yesterday and I I
think about that there's usually a
correlating kind of um sematic sensation
the the neuroscientist Deasia calls it a
sematic marker so by tracking the
sematic markers and then either on your
own just kind of following that
sensation and allowing whatever emotion
was present at the time to complete that
is the way that we kind of by we slowly
pay off that emotional debt by like one
one process at a time
so maybe coming back to this question of
say someone is listening and wondering
am I building emotional debt am I
ignoring things that are these feathers
what are signs and just I don't know
examples of this of emotional dead being
built up of this trauma whatever you
want to call it being built up in the
body I don't know is it just like
anytime you feel really nervous that's
emotional debt is it any time you push
something down that you are pretty sure
you should deal with in the moment
that's emotional debt or are just like
some examples of what that feels like
and looks like yeah so it's typically
different forms of nervous system
disregulation and that shows up as you
know it could be someone's breathing
pattern like if they're constantly in
this sympathetic or hypervigilant state
if they're always you know tracking for
things looking for the worst case
scenario another common one and this is
particularly true in the tech sector is
um being very much in the head and
living in the thoughts and the mind the
entire time and there's a form of
disassociation that happens as a kind of
protection mechanism essentially because
it's it's uncomfortable to be with the
sensations in the body and because our
society tends to reward people for
solving problems and being in their mind
that is a a pattern that continue for
many many years or even decades other
ones are I I think the most obvious one
for people is emotional reactivity where
your response to a certain situation is
disproportionate to what what's happened
so so like for example if you said
something to me of like that doesn't
make any sense and and I was like I I
freeze maybe and this is another
important point that most people have
two two versions of reactivity some
people will kind of freeze withdraw shut
down and disconnect and other people
will like become more aggressive become
bigger and attack and like fight back
and kind of knowing which way you tend
to orient most for me it's usually
shrink and freeze and and shut down um
knowing what your pattern is and and
also knowing what the sensations are
when this happens it's really helpful
for you to be like oh that thing's
happening my priority now is to
downshift and kind of find a sense of of
of of safety basically in the body and
then interact then make the decision
then have the conversation because if
you can keep going from that place of
reactivity like nothing good happens
from that place no great decisions were
made from that place so again that's a
place where having the interceptive
awareness oh this is what's going on
being able to then downshift your system
kind of access the sense of oh like I'm
I'm okay that actually this isn't so bad
and then moving on from there is is a
profoundly like practical and just
useful skill kind of along these same
lines youe somewhere uh this idea that
you have a big competitive Advantage if
you feel the feels is the way you
described it does that ring a bell and
and if so what can you share around that
just why this is so powerful especially
in the workplace yeah so I think I read
about this in one of the every essays I
think the title was the best decision-
making is emotional and I basically
wanted to kind of poke out the phrase I
I think I saw someone on Twitter say
facts over feelings like like don't let
emotions ruin good decision-making and
yeah there's so much that I can say
about this but basically there was a um
a landmark study by this guy deasio
who's this kind of famous neuroscientist
and he studied a patient called Elliot
and Elliot had a tumor in his brain that
was removed and it basically meant that
he was unable to feel
emotions so his entire emotional
capacity was removed and Elliot went
from being a successful married
businessman to divorced broke and unable
to like choose what he could have for
lunch like he was unable to make the
most basic life decisions and it's
because he didn't have access to that
emotional Center in his brain and
so our brain is is like a prediction
making machine and as I mentioned
earlier there's this highway of sensory
data that's coming up through the body
and if we don't listen to that when we
making decisions then we're we're losing
out on a lot of information and what
what tends to happen I see this in
clients that I work with is if they are
avoiding feeling a certain way let's
let's say that they don't enjoy feeling
um conflict or anger then they will make
decisions subconsciously to avoid
feeling that way
and it it becomes you know a huge bias
and a huge problem because people make
decisions because they're afraid of
feeling a certain way and if you're on
the other hand able to just like welcome
and be with whatever emotions would
arise on the other side of a decision
you're able to kind of decide clearly
instead of being skewed one way or the
other easier said than done
yeah do you find there's ever a downside
to being too in touch with what you're
feeling like find like I'm actually not
like a feeler of what I'm feeling kind
of person like I'm pretty stable partly
because I'm not like super in tune with
what I'm feeling a lot of times and
maybe this is a huge problem that I need
to deal with but I don't know it's
worked out okay so far I guess do you
ever find that sometimes it's okay
sometimes like you don't need to know
exactly every moment anything that's
hurting you causing you pain yeah it's
it's a good question and some people do
have you know a very high interceptive
capacity and that can be overwhelming in
which case I would recommend focusing on
the breathing practices to to build that
capacity to downshift so you're able to
just function and you know there's
definitely people who um are overwhelmed
by the stimuli of day-to-day life you
know being out in traffic like they're
very easily overwhelmed and for those
people working on increasing nervous
system capacity to kind of hold that
amount of stress maybe it's through saer
and C plunge or maybe it's through like
gentle titration of of stress and then
and then downshifting like that's
actually really valuable I'd also say
that the the ability to kind of function
well or or this applies to kind of like
high like a lot of high functioning
people which is is probably honestly a
lot of your audience it's it's very
helpful kind of in the moment to kind of
let's say something comes up you you
want to be able to buffer intense
emotions and say get through the meeting
get through whatever it is like that's
it's a very helpful skill but if you
don't then give yourself spaciousness
afterwards to shift and allow yourself
to feel whatever was brought up by that
experience you're going to be adding to
this emotional debt over time and as I
mentioned some people they might only it
might be a year before there's some kind
of breakdown burnout other people it
might be it might be longer and usually
it's more unfortunate in the longer case
because it creates like a long-term
Health crisis and then no amount of
money or time is able to repair the
damage that been done which is um can be
really
tragic M out with Andre John as a great
example of that happening yeah and and
he's and he's a superb example and you
know I I love his vulnerability and
honesty and what he's been through yeah
I think if you're interested in this
topic definitely watch that
episode Another exercise that you talk a
lot about is this idea it's called nsdr
I
think talk about that and when that
might be useful how to go about using
this tool yeah so nsdr was a practice
coined by Andre hean who you mentioned
earlier and it basically uh it's a more
scientific lens on the practice of Yoga
Nidra which is kind of an ancient yoga
practice but I I'm a huge fan of it and
I do it myself most days for kind of 15
to 20 minutes basically what it looks
like is you you lie down put on an eye
mask or blindfold and you listen to a
guided audio I can I I've recorded some
myself so I can share these in the in
the show note link your voice would be
so good for these by the way I this you
found your calling nice yeah it's it's
really fun for me to do but basically
what it involves is a a guided body scan
so this is also a great way to practice
interception because it's something I
didn't mention earlier was that when
there's cortisol present in our body the
cortisol basically acts as a numbing
agent so it's much harder to kind of
tune into those Sensations but using
this I I think it's a 14 minute guided
nsdr practice you're basically lying
down there's a there's a guided body
scan there's like relaxing music in the
background and by the end of it you you
feel you feel like you've had like a
2hour nap like it feels incredible and
particularly for people who like myself
tend to get tired in the afternoons if
you kind of space this out usually
between like 1 and 3 p.m. for me that
will give you a second wind in the
afternoon and it'll mean you won't kind
of end the day collapse on the sofa so I
think it's great for improving
interception it's it's good for allowing
your body to downshift and relax instead
of being in that kind of high tone
sympathetic State all throughout the day
so it gives you gives your body a break
and it's just it just feels really good
like honestly it's it's probably my most
played practice of everything that I
teach it just people listen listen to it
every day so I'll I'll share that in the
show notes as well and I imagine if you
feel like you've built this emotional
debt this would be a really good
exercise to start to do is that right
yeah it's it's fantastic I mean most
people there's some people who struggle
with you know having enough energy to
kind of get get out of bed and function
but again G I I imagine listeners to
your show people that live in Silicon
Valley their challenge is is the
downshifting without external substances
and so nsdr is a really great way of
strengthening that vental vagal tone
which is our body's capacity to go from
like on kind of go go go to then
relaxing um there's a quote from Kevin
Kelly that I I interviewed recently and
he said if you have a great work ethic
that needs to be matched with a great
rest ethic and I think that that kind of
piece of of actually training our
capacity to downshift after stress is
just completely missing from most
people's uh
playbooks I think with a lot of the sort
of advice if you listen to Tim Ferris
and huberman and everyone's got this
like stuff you should be doing every day
list and it ends up being so long and
there's so many things to do cold plunge
SAA uh what is it that you practice or
come back to slash what would you
recommend people try to do daily that is
most impactful of all the stuff we've
talked about first experiment with a
bunch of different practices and see
which you enjoy and and notice how you
feel before and then how you feel
afterwards that's kind of the key
because once you once you know that it
feels good you're not going to have to
like force yourself or motivate yourself
to do it you'll just do it naturally
because you know if you great afterwards
I would recommend starting really simple
so starting with like the the 448
breathing um or humming doing that in
the morning for like just just like two
minutes like two minutes in the
beginning is enough and I would also
recommend listening to the nsdr practice
at least once or twice if you work from
home it's it's pretty easy you know
after after a lunch break something like
that could also be in the evening when
you get home as well some people use it
to to help fall asleep and then the
final thing that I would recommend is is
if you're if you have the resources and
you have access finding a sematic
practitioner or sematic therapist is is
so life-changing I mean I I emerged a
completely different human on the other
side of the kind of 200 breath word
Journeys like I have a different
experience of of Life basically released
so much T even my voice sounds different
like if you listen to the podcast
episodes I recorded four or five years
ago my voice is is higher pitched it's
like um it's it's it just sounds
different it has like a different
resonant quality to it wow okay awesome
so you've kind of summarized I was going
to try to summarize all the advice
you've given but if you were to do the
bare minimum next steps based on this
advice try this 448 336 224 does 224
work too if you just like go real fast
like yeah okay okay um so do that for a
couple mornings see how that does try
this nsdr practice you'll link We link
to a recording of how to do that and
then was there something else you
recommended oh sematic uh worker like
basically a maybe a therapist maybe not
someone that helps you with your
body yeah and I'd add in the the eight
practice for even you know 15 seconds
before the breathing in the morning and
after just so that you notice the
difference and if you do the nsdr that
is uh basically a a 15minute
interception practice as well so you're
kind of getting two birds with one stone
with that practice what's your
perspective on meditation does that fit
into this do you find SDR replaces the
need for meditation that is a big topic
um I I I I am an avid meditator what
I've done you know many 10day silent
Retreats I was in a dark room for 10
days um with meditation I think it
really depends on what you're training
like it's like saying you know what's
your opinion on exercise well are you
training Mobility or stamina or strength
it's the same with meditation you could
be training loving kindness you could
could be training your focus and
attention you could be training spacious
awareness so I'm a big fan of of of
embodied meditation practices so this is
often um the classic Vass body scan is a
good example again I mean that's
basically interceptive practice right
where you're you're just moving your
attention through different parts of
your body over and over and over again
for like days on end in the case of past
and Retreat um meditation is helpful for
the specific skill of increasing the
psychological space between a stimulus
and your response so if you have some
degree of meditation practice instead of
getting wrapped up in a certain emotion
or or even believing a certain thought
pattern there's usually an ability to
kind of step back a little bit and see
if what it is so there definitely is a
place for meditation but my my viewpoint
is that we've kind of over indexed for
mindfulness and meditation in in over
the last 20 years like it's there's so
many apps there's so there's so much
talk about it and we've completely
forgotten the the body based approaches
so I'm not saying don't meditate I think
meditation for sure has its place
especially if your goal is more more of
the traditional waking up and like
seeing through the the nature of the
self like that's that's a different kind
of path in my opinion but if you're
looking to to function more effectively
and kind of be more in tune with your
body then there's a whole different
category of practices in in this bottom
up variety that we've we've touched on
today on the topic of bottom up I
imagine you're a big fan of this book
that everyone always talks about the
body keep score I think it's called
would you recommend that book is it
connected in large part to the stuff you
talk about what do you think of that
that book specifically because I hear
about it all the time yeah it's it's a
good book um it's by Bassel vul and
there's there's another right I think
Peter LaVine says the issues are in the
tissues is basically is basically the
concept and this is the idea that we
have these incomplete mobilization
reflexes that are stored in our body and
often held us tension it's not strictly
true to say that the the trauma is in
the body is's actually a cortical map in
the brain which kind of tracks these
things but for for kind of practical
purposes it looks and feels as if there
is stored grief in my right hip or anger
in my solar plexus like that's that's
the experience that we have and the more
that you become aware of these
Sensations and start to yeah develop
emotional fluidity essentially the more
that that tension is released and the
less reactive you become and the more
emotional debt you pay off so I I think
the body keeps the score I I I think a
more accurate way would be the body is
the score card in a way I think that's
kind of a a slight reframe um and if
you're interested in this the work of
Peter LaVine waking the tiger is kind of
the seminal book on on this like
mobilization reflex stuff that I'm I'm
describing I never knew that part of it
and basically it's actually kept in the
brain but it comes across as somewhere
in the body yeah exactly fascinating I
want to spend little time on a new
segment that we have in this podcast
that I call contrarian corner so let's
visit contrarian corner I feel like you
will have something interesting here so
the question is is there something that
you have a very contrarian opinion about
something that you believe that a lot of
other people really don't believe we've
already touched on I'm not a big fan of
talk-based meditation which will
probably get me some comments
I would imagine um I'd say the other one
that's worth mentioning is I think that
we vastly underestimate the impact of
burnout particularly on a kind of from a
like bottom line perspective there was a
research report that I did a couple of
years ago where we interviewed these
leaders and they'd all experienced
burnout of some degree and we we said if
you were to estimate like how much this
cost your startup a business what would
you say and the median response was
$100,000 which I I imagine is more than
most people would would would think and
you know most people aren't actively
investing in Burnout Insurance like it's
not something that's on many people's
radar besides meditation practices and
and things like that and and I think
part of the reason that the cost is high
is because there are these second and
third order consequences of of like
Talent attrition of opportunity costs
loss productivity you know you lose
great leaders make shitty decisions in
the runup to the burnout itself there's
also this idea of emotional contagion
which there's some research from Warton
I believe and they show that the the
leader of or the the CEO has a
disproportionate impact um or their
emotional state has a disproportionate
impact on the people in their team so um
something I like to say is the the
nervous system of an organization is a
reflection of the nervous system of a
CEO and so I think that's just something
which uh I would like to see talked
about more just on this idea of burnout
I don't think you're saying don't work
really hard if you want to work really
hard it's that you need to maintain your
body and mind and nervous system if
you're working insanely hard like if
you're working long hours you feel free
but just know there's debt you're
building up and you need to be doing
things to pay off that debt as you're
doing that precisely it's it's very much
like building technical debt in the
early days of a startup like it's it's
worth doing but just do it intentionally
like know that you're doing that and
that so let's say you you work really
hard for eight months you know give
yourself a month the two off to like
really downshift and it's also really
worth building that nervous system
capacity like it's great to be able to
push it really hard and focus and then
combine it with that rest ethic as well
so do nsdr kind of find a way to
downshift so that that way of working
can be sustainable Johnny we reached our
very exciting lightning round are you
ready let's do it first question what
are two or three books that you've
recommended most to other people I had a
sense this question was coming and I
have the books with me
here the first book is uh Constellations
by by David White um this is the book
that I've I've gifted most to friends I
think more than any other book and he
basically has 52 definitions of words
like ambition is is I think the first
word and his writing is just it just
blazs me away I I open this to a random
page read the definition and it's just
it's probably affected me more than any
other book so that's that's one that I
love 15 commitments of conscious
leadership which is I imagine has come
up before in your podcast um this is by
Jim death and Diana Chapman they have
the conscious leadership group and this
is basically in my opinion it's it's the
best leadership book that I've come
across and it's it combines practicality
with a lot of great Theory so this is
this is awesome and then finally this is
a bit out there but recapture the
Rapture by by Jamie
wheel um big fan of Jamie's work Jamie's
writing this is is kind of three books
in one the beginning is like kind of
addressing the meta crisis and a lot of
like the craziness that we're seeing in
the world the second chapter is very
related to what we've been talking about
he calls it honic engineering and it's
basically practices for accessing
shifting shifting just your State of
Consciousness and the third is ethical
cult building which I'll just I'll leave
that there amazing
do you have a favorite recent movie or
TV show you really enjoyed my wife and I
love animations and we saw Kubo and the
two strings recently which was fantastic
so so great and that and also wolf
Walkers which was an Apple TV series um
yeah those have been my two favorite
movies I've seen recently if you like
animated uh content check out scavengers
rain on HBO I've mentioned it on this
podcast before but it's incredible
incredible it's a TV show on HBO so I
usually ask do you have a favorite
question you like to ask candidates
you're interviewing but I know you coach
people so to kind of turn this question
a little bit around do you have a
favorite question you like to ask
Executive coaching clients that you work
with I stole this question from a guy
Jerry Kona who's who's here in Boulder
and the question is amazing it has it's
so good um it's
basically how are you complicit in
creating the conditions that you say you
don't want and so the word complicit
there is key because it's not saying
like in what ways is it your fault but
it's like in what in what ways were you
complicit in creating the conditions for
anxiety for building up emotional debt
and just the question kind of opens up
the door to ways in which you're like an
active participant in creating these
challenges in your life and that's a
it's a really rich Journal question or a
question to explore with with a friend
co-founder colleague I I remember him
sharing that on the Tim Ferris podcast
many years ago and I stuck with me and I
often think of it but I I never am
complicit in anything that goes wrong
it's never my
fault he has nothing on me just kidding
excellent do you have a favorite product
you've recently discovered that you
really like one is uh these blue
blocking glasses um these are raw Optics
blue blue blocker glasses they they
block out 100% of blue light and they
are a lifesaver if I'm ever um going out
of the house basically after dark I'll
wear these to drive I'll wear these to
even like dinners with friends sometimes
and it basically means that uh I'm able
to then sleep well that evening um so
that's that's one and then the other
thing I'll briefly share this is this
came through the other day you mentioned
the Vagas nerve earlier and that that
device I have three devices here that
are all Vagas nerve stimulation devices
this one is called
neuroim this one I believe is petto and
I think this is a Apollo strap I haven't
used them that much yet but they
basically work by sending lowlevel
Electric electrical stimulation directly
to your Vegas nerve so this Clips on
your your ear because the vas nerve goes
through the the right side of the neck
same with petto and I'm really curious
to kind of compare the effect of these
versus say breath work humming the other
body based practices obviously you can
do both at the same time but I'm I'm
just interested in playing so I wouldn't
recommend them yet but I think it's
interesting that they exist how cool
would that be we just put these things
on we don't have to do anything else we
just get up right slap on our device and
life is amazing have to meditate don't
have to breathe in a different way I'm
gonna yeah to do this while I'm on the
podcast just wear all these
devices see how that goes awesome well I
guess somehow report back to us uh how
these go because sure that feels really
great next question do you have a
favorite life motto that you often come
back to share with friends either in
work or in life a state over story would
be one which we've touched on state over
story and then I think the other one
which I think about often is uh I say I
like to say make generous
assumptions and by that I mean in any
situation like what is the most generous
story that I can tell of this person of
this situation not kind of naively
fabricating something but like usually
there's a spectrum of of like I can
assume that they're a bad person and
they did this thing out of spite or
maybe they had a bad day maybe they have
a lot of emotional debt you know there's
there's many stories that can be told
and I usually try to have a practice of
of telling the most generous story that
I can I like that a lot another way of
describing that is just assume good
intentions which I often think about
exactly final question you seem
extremely calm always and very centered
and stable what still gets you riled up
and unsettled and what do you do when
that
happens um well I was I was nervous
before this podcast um so I did some I
did some breathing practices uh and some
stretching and some humming before
jumping on here I I still at times
notice ways in which I'm conflict
avoidant I've been working on it for a
while but there's a part of me that can
sometimes avoid conflict and so I I've
actually noticed how there's a
relationship between that and having a
healthy relationship to anger so
basically giving myself permission to
express frustration not at someone but
like just allow it to be there and then
from that place set better boundaries
with with my time with what I'm doing
saying no to certain things I think
that's that's the practice that's most
alive for me right now Johnny you are
awesome two final questions working
folks find you online and explore the
things that you offer I think you teach
a course whatever else you offered talk
about that and then how can listeners be
useful to you yeah well this has been so
much fun um I am I'm very active on
Twitter or X the my handle is Johnny
Miller it's j o n n y M1 l l e r and
yeah if this was interesting or
listeners would like to dive deeper I
teach a course uh our next cohort is is
running in the spring the end of March
applications are now open and the
website is nsasy
docomomo discount for listeners if they
if they want to sign up I'm gonna I
gotta sign up for this myself I didn't
know you were gonna do that that's
awesome yeah and NS Mastery stands for
nervous system Mastery exactly amazing
anything else and then the second
question of how listeners can be useful
to you well well firstly if if any of
this resonates I'd love to hear from you
on on Twitter um or or email me as well
I can I can pass pass over my email and
I would just love it if if you
experiment with with the stuff like I I
I love this idea of just being a a
scientist of life um so if anything that
we've talked about resonates or any of
the practices you want to try just just
go out and try it and and see how it
feels I think that would be um and and
then tell me about it that would be the
the greatest gift I think and best way
to tell you about it is tweet at you or
there something else tweet at me or my
email is Johnny curus humans.com so feel
free to email me as well all right I'm
gonna use all these things Johnny thank
you so much for being here you're
awesome I'm excited for the show notes
we're going to have to give people
actual tools to use to become less
anxious and nervous in their work in
life thank you again for being here
amazing thanks so much Len this was
super fun same for me bye
everyone thank you so much for listening
if you found this valuable you can
subscribe to the show on Apple podcast
Spotify or your favorite podcast app
also please consider giving us a rating
or leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast you can
find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lenp podcast.com see
you in the next
episode